---
layout: post
title: "Strimzi survey: we want to hear from you!"
date: 2021-06-03
author: paolo_patierno
---

With the help of the CNCF, we're running another survey of the Strimzi community.
The main purpose is to hear from Strimzi users in order to know how they are using Strimzi.
This is really useful to the maintainers and contributors to make better decisions in terms of new features and define the roadmap of the project itself.

It would be great if you could spare the 5–10 minutes needed to [take the survey](https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/Strimzi-2022).

<!--more-->

## What we are interested in

We are interested in knowing about your usage of Strimzi, whether it's for development, evaluation or already in production.
In order to provide better support and backward compatibility, it is important to have an understanding of what Kubernetes versions our users are deploying Strimzi on.
Kubernetes API changes and deprecations can have an impact on the Strimzi project as well.

Similarly, it's helpful to the project to understand how quickly users adopt new Strimzi releases, and what prompts them to upgrade.

One of the most interesting features was the Kafka Connect Build. You can read more about it [here](https://strimzi.io/blog/2021/03/29/connector-build/).
It allows to build a new Kafka Connect image including the connectors you need, from different sources.
Maybe not all the users in the community know about it or others are already using it.
It is really useful for us to know.

We also introduced several Feature Gates in the recent versions.
These gates enable you to try new functionality and test it before it gets enabled by default.
But right now we don't know how many users are actually making use of them.

There are different ways to be engaged within the community and with the maintainers directly.
Reading the documentation, blog posts or the source code can be valuable to solve your issues. But sometime users require more interactive help. So we'd like to know which of the these options people find most useful when learning about how to use Strimzi effectively.

Regarding our blog, we would like to know what are the topics of most interest to you.
We want to write useful content which could help the community to use the project or to learn more about Apache Kafka as well.

If you are willing to take it, [here](https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/Strimzi-2022) is the survey that will be open until July 1st.