---
layout: post
title: "Strimzi survey: we want to hear from you!"
date: 2021-05-13
author: paolo_patierno
---

As every year, with the help of the CNCF, we run a survey of the Strimzi community.
The main purpose is about hearing from the users in order to know how they are using Strimzi.
This is really useful to the maintainers to make better decisions in terms of new features and define the roadmap of the project itself.

It is a really short survey with a few questions but it represents a huge help for us.
It would be great if you could take the time for it.

<!--more-->

## What we are interested in?

We are interested to know what is your usage of Strimzi, if just for development, evaluation or already in production.
In order to provide better support and backward compatibility, it is important to get the most used Kubernetes versions.
Kubernetes API changes and deprecations can have an impact on the Strimzi project as well.

Upgrading a Strimzi cluster can be done at different times by different users.
On every new operator release, when new valuable features are added or when a new Kafka version is supported. What is your choice?

One of the most recent features was the Kafka Connect Build.
It allows to build a new Kafka Connect image including the connectors you need, from different sources.
Maybe not all the users in the community know about it or others are already using it.
It is really useful for us to know.

We also introduced several Feature Gates in the recent versions.
You can enable and try new functionalities thanks to the gates, to test what is new before it will be enabled by default.

There are different ways to be engaged within the community and with the maintainers directly.
If you use the Slack channel, the mailing list or GitHub discussions is useful to know for us.
Reading the documentation, blog posts or the source code can be valuable to solve your issues. How much you use these different ways?

Regarding our blog, we would like to know what are the topic of most interest to you.
We want to write useful content which could help the community to use the project or to learn more about Apache Kafka as well.

If you are willing to take it, [here](LINK_PLACEHOLDER) is the survey that will be opened until <DEADLINE_PLACEHOLDER>.

## Conclusion

This survey is really important to us.
It will take just a few minutes to you but with a huge value for the future of the project.
Looking forward to hear your voice!